# Foundations of the Church in the Old Testament

## 1. Introduction

The aim of this paper is to look at how the church is mirrored in the Old Testament, to see whether in the early texts there are any hints about the church of Christ and if it would be possible to already understand from those texts what the church and its role would be. 

This would not only be a way to confirm God's plan for those who only read and believe in the Old Testament but also for Christians today, that they are indeed the Church that Christ desired, God's precious possession which fulfills its purpose on earth and was built on the apostles and prophets with Jesus as cornerstone (Ephesians 2:19-21).

In order to find the roots of the church we will need to engage in a longer journey starting from the beginnings of the humankind and following the people of Israel throughout the Old Testament. Where a parallel is found between the old and the new testament, points will be made on what has changed and what remained the same with the coming of Christ and the new covenant.

## 2. How everything started

When Adam and Eve sinned for the first time in the garden of Eden by eating from the forbidden tree, the fellowship with their maker was broken. As we can see they were hiding when they heard God was walking through the garden (Genesis 3:6-8). Why did this happen? Because they grabbed something that mankind can't handle, which is conscience. Knowledge of good and evil from a limited perspective ruined the human condition, leaving man with a sense of guilt, angry and alienated, with an inner emptiness, always craving but never succeeding to fill it (Genesis 3:17-19).

When asked why they had eaten from the tree they had been commanded not to eat from, Adam shifted the blame to Eve, and Eve to the serpent instead of repenting and asking for forgiveness (Genesis 3:11-13). They received their punishment which contained a prophecy within itself, or a covenant of the woman's offspring redeemer that would crush the evil and save humanity. It was not yet revealed that God was planning to sacrifice His only begotten Son, practically sacrificing  himself by becoming a man in order to demonstrate that love can undo evil and restore the human condition and the unity of the creation to its maker (John 3:20-23). As they were banished from the garden so they would not eat from the tree of life as well and have eternal life, God provided them with animal skin garments implying a first sacrifice of animals to account for their sin.  

Therefore, these two, the promise of a redeemer and the animal sacrifice are the first glimpses of the future Church of Jesus Christ. 

We can see that the first children of Adam and Eve, Cain and Abel were bringing offerings to the Lord as they probably had learned from their parents. At this point, one could wonder how the animal sacrifice would work or why it would be enough to pay for sins of humans. The sacrifice has two components: the first one is the admitting of guilt and repentance of sins (which Adam and Eve had failed to do in the garden) and the second component is the blood of a pure animal which is only a valuable life sacrificed as a symbol of the ultimate and love bearing sacrifice (Hebrews 10:4) that was promised in Jesus Christ. We will see in the next passages that this example pointing to the future sacrifice of Jesus will be presented in several places in the Old Testament. We will also see several examples when an offering was rejected by God, as in the case of Cain because it was missing one or both components of the true sacrifice (Genesis 4:5-7). The sacrifice was either made without repentance, from an unfaithful heart (Hebrews 11:4) or what was offered as a sacrifice didn't obey God's commands.

**One could also question why God didn't restore the broken unity and get rid of the evil right away? Why is God using the same lost humans that He is trying to save in his plan?** As mentioned above, in our limited understanding we probably can't answer this with certainty. We can only see that God considered humanity his precious possession and in His love He didn't want to destroy it. Moreover, humankind received an important role in God's salvation plan. We can also see that God wanted that people would not be forced into righteousness but choose God's love freely by accepting Christ in order to have eternal life and reign again in heaven -*Gan Eden*- together with their creator.

## 3. God's continued struggle to redeem humanity

The next manifestations of church precursors are in God's struggle to redeem humanity from evil through covenants. The first was the covenant with Noah (Genesis 8,9) after the flood, with an unconditional promise not to destroy the entire life on earth again through water flooding. On this occasion we see again that Noah built an altar and brought offerings from clean animals. The second covenant was with Abraham (Genesis 12,15,17), later renewed to Jacob, promising that he and his descendants will be a blessing for all the people on earth. Here we see Israel's mission to bring God's salvation to all nations. In the case of Abraham we are given an even stronger hint towards the sacrifice of Jesus Christ through the example of God testing Abraham's faith by asking him to sacrifice his son Isaac.

Afterwards, when the people of Israel reached the mount Sinai led by Moses out of Egypt, God renewed the covenant with Abraham promising to make the people of Israel a kingdom of priests, a holy nation and God'S treasured possession (Exodus 19). Again we have an indication for God's salvation plan in the sacrifice of the lamb and the protection of the households through his blood. In this case the covenant was not unconditional,since Moses brought back from his encounter with God on the mountain the law of God that the nation of Israel had to obey in order to prove their allegiance to God and to receive blessings. This was already implying a different type of sacrifice that resonates with Jesus' words in John 14:23-24 *Jesus replied, Anyone who loves me will obey my teaching*. 

There are more indications towards the future church in the exodus story. In the Old Testament Israel was the chosen nation but this changed in the New Testament where in Jesus Christ there are no more barriers to become children of God, Abraham's seed and heirs to the promise (Galatians 3:26-29). There is also a parallel between the Hebrew celebrations in remembrance of the exodus and the main events in the Christian church history. The crucifixion of Jesus happened on passover (Pesach) (John 19:14, Luke 22:7-14) when the sacrifice of the lamb and the salvation through his blood was celebrated. Pentecost, when the Holy Spirit descended, which is also the birth of the church, followed 50 days after the resurrection, at the same time when Shavuot, the giving of the law at mount Sinai, was celebrated.

After entering the promised land, God establishes a covenant with king David (2 Samuel 7) promising him a descendant that would build God's temple, who would rule over God's people and who's throne and kingdom would last forever. This covenant becomes the basis for the hope of a Messiah, the Hebrew meaning of the anointed king of Davidic line, and explains the Gospels' concern to show that Jesus/Yeshua, meaning redeemer or deliverer in Hebrew (sharp watcher of the flock), was the rightful King that would deliver God's treasured people from evil. We will see in the prophecies that the Messiah was expected by people of those times to restore both the temple and the kingdom of David, especially after the people of Israel had ended in exile and the temple had been destroyed, making the offering of sacrifices impossible (Zechariah 6:13).

## 4. Office of the priest

The first mention of a priest in the Old Testament is in Genesis 14:18 when the King priest of Salem, Melchizedek brought bread and wine and blessed Abraham before God Most High. This is an important passage not only because of the symbolism of the bread and wine that resonate with Jesus's last supper but also because in Psalm 110 (the most quoted passage of OT in the NT) Jesus is promised as the eternal priest in the order of Melchizedek. Hebrews 7:21 confirms that God keeps His promises and Jesus became the assurance of the new covenant forever. He holds his priesthood permanently and is able to save anyone who draws near to God through Him, as He lives to make intercession for us (Hebrews 7:24-25). 

Here we can see the role or purpose of the church. As a result of our union with Christ, we are reminded of our Melchizedekian calling to consequently spread the love we received from God and desire to save humanity, thus expanding the kingdom of God by proclaiming the gospel of the perfect priest with infinite mercy to the rest of the world.

During the exodus when Moses received the law, he instituted the Aaronic priesthood. So, although the entire nation constituted *a kingdom of priests*, the Lord assigned Aaron's descendants to be the perpetual priestly clan in Israel and their tribe of Levi were also appointed to help the priests in keeping the proper purity levels of the sanctuary. Moses was the first of the priests, as we see in Exodus 24:2-8. He brought offerings after the reading of the law and the people of Israel promised to do everything that the LORD had said. He sealed the covenant with the blood of the sacrifice. The Levites had duties like transporting the tabernacle or guarding the gate of the tabernacle and, later, in the purification procedures and the preparation of the offerings at the temple. However, only the priests were allowed to enter the Holy Place and bring the burnt offerings to the altar. Only the high priest was allowed to enter the Holy of Holies or The Most Holy Place on the day of atonement (Yom Kippur) in order to purify the mercy seat on the ark of the covenant by sprinkling the sin offering blood on it, and to bring the burnt offering for the sins of the entire nation of Israel.

Yom-Kippur (The Day of Atonement) was celebrated at the beginning of each year starting with the exodus from Egypt and the arrival at mount Sinai. It marks the culmination of the 10 days of Awe, a period of introspection and repentance following the Rosh Hashanah, the jewish New Year. It was the most sacred day of the year, when the high priest made atonement and asked for God’s forgiveness on behalf of all the people of Israel. We can observe again the two elements of the sacrifice, namely the repentance and asking for the forgiveness of sins on the one hand, and the shedding of pure blood as a symbol of the redemption payment, on the other hand, without which a sacrifice would not be accepted. 

It is also important to notice that, although in the beginning the people brought their own sacrifices, after the mosaic law was instituted following the exodus, it was the duty of the priests to keep themselves and the sanctuary pure and bring all types of sacrifices: burnt offerings, grain offerings, peace offerings, sin offerings or guilt offerings, yet in all cases they din't possess a special power of their own to forgive sins or restore the broken relationship between God and humanity. It was God's grace that was implored before His Presence on the seat of mercy.

After the coming of Jesus, the priesthood responsibility to bring spiritual sacrifices through Jesus Christ was given to all believers (1 Peter 2:4-5, 9-10). There is no special class of people needed to act as institutional priests any longer. Furthermore, neither animal sacrifices nor an atonement day are needed as they were only a symbol of the one perpetual sacrifice and atonement of Jesus Christ through which believers are made perfect and eternally holy. Moreover, the believers are called to follow the example of Jesus and become priests that would sacrifice their own lives for the others as this is the true worship that pleases God (Romans 12:1, Hebrews 13:15-16).

## 5. Office of the king

The kings of Israel were the chosen leaders to protect the nation from outside enemies using either political or military power, so they were required to strengthen the defenses and were not allowed to gather great riches for themselves. In the same time they were required to possess a copy of the books of the law of Moses (Torah) (Deuteronomy 17:18-19) and study it daily under the advice of the priests. The King was also expected to guarantee that the nation would follow the covenant and obey the laws of God. Moreover he was not above the law and the power to judge was given to the priests, Levites and prophets who would also oversee that the nation upheld the law of God, starting with the king.

There were occasions when the King himself would bring sacrifices acting as a priest (2 Samuel 24:18, 1 Kings 3:4) at the instruction of God through the prophets. There is also the negative example of Saul who offered a sacrifice on his own (1 Samuel 10:8) without listening to the instructions of the prophet Samuel to wait for 7 days for him, losing in this way the favor in God's eyes and his establishment as King.

The authority of the King was in governing the gathering of righteous people so that divine justice was guaranteed. At the same time, a king who loved his people was a king that would be ready to become a martyr, fighting with the enemies on his own as a champion of the people.

As we have seen in the previous chapter that all believers were called by Jesus to become self sacrificing priests, there is also a promise in the New Testament that the believers will inherit the kingdom of Christ becoming kings and reigning together with Christ (2 Timothy 2:12, Revelation 5:9-11). Of course, this kingdom is not of this earth, as the people were thinking (Luke 17:20-21, John 18:36), nor any kind of political or economical power through the establishing of an institution as it happened in the middle ages history of the church.

## 6. Office of the prophet

The prophets were called to declare God's will or God's Word to the people in case of distress from the enemies or in case the people were worshipping idols. In some cases the King himself needed to be admonished by the prophets because he didn't fulfill God's will or had worshiped idols himself. 

Prophets were never speaking of their own but only what had been revealed to them through the Holy Spirit. Sometimes they would have other gifts like the power of healing in the case of Elisha healing Naaman. Similar to this, there were other instances when prophets ended in the service of foreign kings or nations, like Daniel in Babylon or Jonah in Ninive but, again, only to fulfill God's will through those Kings or nations.

The work of the prophets should not be confused with that of the *Teachers of the law* who were scribes who knew the Torah and were able to explain it to the people. There were also cases when some women pretended to be prophets but they were practicing some magic out of their own hearts, like in Ezekiel 13:17–23. There were warnings also against false prophets that would speak only what people would like to hear for material gain (Jeremiah 32:1–5).

In many prophetic books there is a very clear indication of the coming of the Messiah, like in the books of Isaiah or Daniel, or there are prophetic books that bear a great witness to the Gospel, like in the book of Jonah. One interesting case is that of John the Baptist foretold by the Prophet Isaiah (Isaiah 40:3-5) saying that he would come before Jesus to prepare the way of the Lord (John 1:19-34) and that he would baptize with water. It was also foretold that the one who would come after him, would baptize with the Holy Spirit. The water immersion was already known to the people of Israel from the purification rituals of mikvah (Hebrew מִקְוֶה) but John's baptism was a preparation for what was to become the main calling of the church in making disciples of those baptized or sealed with the Holy Spirit.

Like in the case of the priesthood office that was given to all called believers after the coming of Jesus, the gifts of the Holy spirit that had initially been given only to the prophets in the Old Testament, are now available to all believers, with the promise of the helper (John 14:12-17) and the call to be filled with the Holy Spirit (Ephesians 5:18). Also as the will of God was revealed to the prophets and they were able to proclaim the coming judgement of God like Jonah or Ezekiel, in the same way Christians will be able to understand the will of God through the Holy Spirit and they will be able to rightfully judge all things (1 Corinthians 2:11-16).

## 7. God's continued presence

Even with the union between God and man having been broken by the fall and the rebellion of the people of Israel later on, God didn't stay away from his chosen people. He was present in the form of a cloud pillar during the day and a pillar of fire during the night leading them through the desert (Exodus 13:21). Also during the exodus, God gave instructions on how to build the Ark of the Covenant, a symbol of the presence of the Lord containing the tablets of the law and Aaron's rod (symbol of chosen priesthood) and having the mercy seat on top of it. It was there that God would give instructions to the Israelites (Exodus 25:22). Most of the time the ark of the covenant was kept in the Holy of Holies inside the tabernacle (Exodus 25-27 tent of meeting), which was considered to be the dwelling place of God (mishkan meaning in hebrew: to dwell). Later it was placed in the Holy of Holies in the temple of Solomon (1 Kings 8:1-66), and the Glory of God's presence (Kabod or Shekinah) filled the tabernacle (Exodus 40:34-35) and the temple (1 Kings 8:11) until the destruction of the temple by King Nebuchadnezzar in 586 BC (Ezekiel 10:18-19). God's Glory reappeared only at the birth of Jesus in Bethlehem as accounted in Luke 2:9 *An angel of the Lord appeared to them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified.* This is how it had been foretold by the prophet Isaiah:  *Then the glory of the LORD will be shown, and all people together will see it.*(Isaiah 40:5)

The terms used in the Old Testament for congregation or assembly with the purpose of worship or instruction (like in Deuteronomy 9:10) to receive the laws, are קָהָל qahal with the root letters קָל, which are the signs of a sunset and a shepherd rod, meaning the shepherd calling his flock at sunset; and עֵדָה edah with root letters עֵד, which are the signs for an eye and an entry gate or door meaning people gathered to bear witness. Both words must have had a great resonance for the jews listening to the words of Jesus in John 10:7-17 *I am the good shepherd; I know my sheep and my sheep know me — just as the Father knows me and I know the Father — and I lay down my life for the sheep.* and in Acts 1:6-8 *But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.* In the Greek version of the New Testament the term ἐκκλησία ekklesia meant `those called out`, similar to the terms used in the Old Testament. In the Aramaic version the term `edah`, mentioned above, was also used like in the Old Testament. 

What changed in the New Testament was the fact that the geographical place of gathering was not the most important thing anymore and the center of faith moved from a stone temple to the heart of the believer. The believer became the new temple built on the cornerstone Jesus Christ (John 4:23) and, instead of a chosen nation, those who have been sealed with the Holy Spirit have became God's chosen people (Ephesians 1:13-14). What remained the same even with the new covenant is the sinners´ need of repentance and forgiveness as a response to God's love and as a first step towards regeneration and unification with Christ (Romans 3:23).

Through the coming of the promised Messiah the covenants of the Old Testament were fulfilled (Acts 3:21), the price for the sin of humankind was paid, the evil was defeated, and a new covenant was established (Jeremiah 31:31-34, Luke 22:20, Romans 7:6). Salvation, which is freely available to everyone believing in the risen Son of God, was pictured at Mount Sinai by the healing of all those looking at the bronze snake raised by Moses in the desert (John 3:14-15; Numbers 21:4-9). The curtain of the Jerusalem temple was torn in two (Matthew 27:51) and the Holy of Holies, the dwelling place of God, has been open to all those cleansed and unified with God in one Spirit (Romans 8:9, Colossians 3:1-4, 1 Corinthians 12:12-13). The broken fellowship from Genesis has been restored (1 Corinthians 15:22, Romans 5:12), the old garden of Eden will be reestablished on the new earth and under the new heaven. In order to reign together with Christ in the new Jerusalem (Revelation 21:1-8), the church will receive the eternal life that Adam and Eve had lost (Romans 6:23).

## 8. Conclusion

As stated at the very beginning, the aim of this paper was to bring forth some aspects of how the church, although born much later, had been prepared even from the moment of creation, to partake in God's redemption plan and to share through the unification with Christ, the promised Redeemer, the same crucial mission of saving humanity from evil.

## Bibliography
    Wayne Grudem, Systematic Theology
    Herman Bavinck, Systematic Theology Vol. 4
    Augustus C. Strong, Systematic Theology
    Jeff A. Brenner, Ancient Hebrew Lexicon of the Bible
    Jeff A. Brenner, An Ancient Hebrew Perspective of the Names of God
    Aurel Gheorghe, 50 Theses for the Reformation of Christianity nowadays
    Christopher Morgan, The Origin and the Nature of the Church
    Lita Sanders, Dwelling with God: From Eden to the New Jerusalem
    Whitney Wollard, The 5 Key Covenants God makes with Humans in the Bible
    Brett A. Berger, What are the Biblical Covenants?
   
